# odf2jats

Developing an automatic tagging workflow to produce **JATS XML** output from manuscripts in **Open Document Format** (.odt files).

## Open Document Format

Open Document Format is a free ISO-standardized format for documents (.odt file extension), spreadsheets (.ods) presentations and more.
ODF is supported by many programs and used as a native format by the free LibreOffice suite and OpenOffice.org.

## Project goals

### Improve the worflow for Open Access Scholarly Publishing

To simplify, reduce time needed and as much as possible, automate the conversion from manuscripts to be represented in the Journal Archive Tag Suite (JATS) XML tagset.

- http://jats.nlm.nih.gov/publishing/
- http://jats.nlm.nih.gov/publishing/tag-library/1.1d2/index.html

## Motivation

### Don't let a person do a machine's job

Marking up manuscripts by hand is very time-consuming. The ODF format is a zipped container with text/xml-files and other files. 

If the manuscripts use a known template and use consistent styling, it is very possible to automatically generate most of the structure and 
semantics needed to mark up a manuscript using the JATS tagset.

### Automation using XSLT 2.0 and XProc

By exploiting XSLT 2.0, XPath 2.0 and XProc, it is possible to automate extraction/transformation of the contents from the ODF-format to be 
represented in another XML based format such as JATS. 

By utilizing RegEx pattern-matching that is available in XSLT 2.0 and XPath 2.0 it is possible to identify, tokenize and automatically tag text citations and references in the reference list.

By utilizing XSLT 2.0's grouping capabilities it is possible to properly structure a flat xml document to a proper sectioned document.

## Proper styling of documents

### Preserving the outline

It is important for the manuscript to properly communicate the outline.

For best results, all headers in the original manuscript should be styled using header 
styles of the appropriate level (and not formatted using character formatting). These header styles need to 
have an outline level set in the style configuration, for the default header-styles this is normally
the case. But if a user creates own header styles, this is something to keep in mind.

The outline level is used to automatically section the body of the JATS xml in sec/title + other elements.

Text in the manuscript should be styled with the default paragraph style for text.

Special passages of text can be styled using custom paragraph styles that when 
using a style-mapping in the odf2jats pipeline can facilitate automatic tagging of certain elements.

This style-mapping will be used in generating the structure and semantics 
needed to mark up the manuscript using the JATS tagset.

### Using character styles

Using character styling where appropriate is also important.
Character styles such as bold, italic, subscript and superscript are all supported.

In the reference list, the proper use of italic character style following the APA style guidelines, is
important to facilitate the reference parsing.

## Already implemented/autotagged

### Extraction from the ODF container format
- paragraphs
- lists that can be nested
- tables
- headings (6 levels)
- footnotes: xref pointing to the footnotes are left in the text, and the footnotes are grouped in back/fn-group
- **journal-meta**
    - a template for a journal has been included, it could be changed for different journals by using a parameter to the pipeline
- **article-meta**
    - article title (if it has been styled with title paragraph style in the odt document).
    - article authors (if styled with person paragraph style in the odt document).
    - abstract
    - keywords
- adjacent (following) italic elements with only punctuation or whitespace between are merged in references
- **book/book-chapter type references**
    - authors
    - year
    - source (if book type reference)
    - trans-source (if applicable, book type ref)
    - book-chapter (if book-chapter type reference)
    - trans-title (if applicable)
    - editors (if book-chapter type ref)
    - source (if book-chapter type ref)
    - trans-source (if applicable, book-chapter type ref)
    - edition (if applicable)
    - fpage (if applicable)
    - lpage (if applicable)
    - publisher-loc
    - publisher-name
    - uri (if applicable)
- **journal type references**
    - authors
    - year
    - article-title
    - trans-title (if applicable)
    - source
    - volume (if applicable)
    - issue (if applicable)
    - fpage (if applicable)
    - lpage (if applicable)
    - uri (if applicable)

### Grouping, sectioning and parsing
- the body contents of the document is properly sectioned using sec/title elements based on the outline level on the headings
- citations in the text are identified by regex pattern matching and marked up as xref elements: ```<xref ref-type="bibr" rid="{autogenerated id}">...</xref>```

## Todo

### Extraction from the ODF container format to JATS
- figures (not implemented)
- article-meta/history: a change in the source document is needed for automatic extraction
- article-meta issue and volume: a change in the source document is needed for automatic extraction
- libre office can't access this information in the sample document because of ms word format incompatibilty
    - volume of the article
    - issue of the article
    - fpage of the article
    - lpage of the article

### Improve ref-list autotagging
- Journal type references
    - elocation-id not implemented
- Refs starting with following, fail:
    - NICE. (2012).
    - WHO. (2000).
    - Institute of Medicine. (2001).
- Many authors (8 or more) need better handling
    - APA style: after the 6th author there will be an ellipsis, followed by the last author
    - currently the last author has dots before the name tagged in JATS
    - I have to decide what to do in this case; 
       - only mark up the 7 listed authors in the supplied ref list and leave it at that?
       - or should inserted a comment to remind the JATS xml author to try and find the missing authors
       - even if they will not be displayed in the html-file, it could make sense to have it in JATS xml.

### Content in the back section after references
- tables/appendixes in the back section haven't been properly handled yet

### Content in the body
- table labels/titles/captions are not automatically handled yet
    - this can be done automatically if they are styled with a special paragraph style do identify the content as being table label, table title or table caption
- citations in the text that only have year within the parens, 
  have **rid** attributes that misses capital letters from author's surname. 
    - extract relevant capital letters from the text node directly before the xref-element?
    - leave it as is and let the person doing the conversion manually fix those **rid** attributes?

### Writing and styling aids for editors and authors

- develop document templates for use by editors and authors
- develop document styling guidelines that will help facilitate (semi)automatic conversion from manuscript document to JATS

By exercising some control over the source documents the manuscripts are written in, the automatic conversion can be greatly simplified by 
taking advantage of style mappings from paragraph styles in the document to generate appropriate JATS xml markup.

Therefore, document templates and a style guide should be made available to the authors and editors.

This way, most of the work of identifying how elements in the document should be mapped to JATS will already have been done by the authors,
and odf2jats will do the conversion with minimal need for user input.

## Related projects

The JATS XML file that this project aims to autogenerate is to be used with the jats2epub tool.
I am also working on a solution for automatically tagging Office Open XML documents.

- https://github.com/eirikhanssen/ooxml2jats - automatic tagging using Office Open XML format as a base
- https://github.com/eirikhanssen/jats2epub - generation of HTML fulltext, .epub and optionally .mobi formats from JATS XML source

## How to contribute

If you're interested in this project you can
- fork this project and issue a pull request
- send me a message
